# Libreswan

The Libreswan Project   https://libreswan.org/

Libreswan is an Internet Key Exchange (IKE) implementation for Linux,
FreeBSD, NetBSD and OpenBSD.  It supports IKEv1 and IKEv2 and has
support for most of the extensions (RFC + IETF drafts) related to
IPsec, including IKEv2, X.509 Digital Certificates, NAT Traversal, and
many others.

Libreswan was forked from Openswan 2.6.38, which was forked from
FreeS/WAN 2.04.  See the CREDITS files for contributor
acknowledgments.

It can be downloaded from:

    https://download.libreswan.org/

A Git repository is available at:

    https://github.com/libreswan/libreswan/

## License

The bulk of libreswan is licensed under the GNU General Public License
version 2; see the LICENSE and CREDIT.* files.  Some smaller parts
have a different license.

## Installing

A pre-built Libreswan package is available on the following OS
distributions: RHEL, Fedora, CentOS, Ubuntu, Debian, Arch, Apline,
OpenWrt and FreeBSD.  On NetBSD the package sources are in
wip/libreswan.

Unless a source-based build is truly needed,  it is often best to use
the pre-built version of the distribution you are using.

## Installing from Source

### Dependencies

There are a few packages required for Libreswan to compile from
source:

For Debian / Ubuntu / Mint

    apt-get install build-essential pkg-config \
      bison flex libnss3-dev libnss3-tools libevent-dev \
      libunbound-dev libpam0g-dev libcap-ng-dev \
      libldns-dev xmlto libcurl4-openssl-dev

For Fedora/CentOS-Stream/RHEL/AlmaLinux/RockyLinux etc.

    dnf install audit-libs-devel bison curl-devel flex \
      gcc ldns-devel libcap-ng-devel libevent-devel \
      libseccomp-devel libselinux-devel make nspr-devel \
      nss-devel pam-devel pkgconfig systemd-devel \
      unbound-devel xmlto

Alpine Linux:

    aph add mandoc mandoc-doc apk-tools-doc bison \
      bison-doc bsd-compat-headers coreutils coreutils-doc \
      curl-dev curl-doc flex flex-doc gcc gcc-doc git git-doc \
      gmp-dev gmp-doc ldns-dev ldns-doc libcap-ng-dev \
      libcap-ng-doc libevent-dev linux-pam-dev linux-pam-doc \
      make make-doc musl-dev nspr-dev nss-dev nss-tools \
      pkgconfig sed sed-doc unbound-doc unbound-dev \
      xmlto xmlto-doc

FreeBSD:

    pkg install gmake git pkgconf nss libevent unbound bison \
      flex ldns xmlto gcc

NetBSD:

    pkgin install git gmake nss unbound bison flex ldns xmlto pkgconf

OpenBSD:

    pkg_add gmake nss libevent libunbound bison libldns xmlto \
      curl git llvm%16

### Building from scratch into /usr/local

GNU Make is used:

    gmake
    sudo gmake install

If you want to build without creating and installing manual pages, run:

    gmake base
    sudo gmake install-base

### Building for RPM based systems

Install requirements for rpm package building:

    dnf install rpm-build rpmdevtools

The packaging/ directory is used to find the proper spec file for your
distribution.  Simply issue the command:

    make rpm

You can also pick a specific spec file.  For example, to build for
CentOS8, use:

    rpmbuild -ba packaging/centos/8/libreswan.spec

### Building for DEB based systems

The packaging/debian directory is used to build deb files.  Simply
issue the command:

    make deb

## Starting Libreswan

The install will detect the init system used (systemd, upstart,
sysvinit, openrc) and should integrate with the linux distribution.
The service name is called "ipsec".  For example, on CentOS Stream 9,
one would use:

    systemctl enable ipsec.service
    systemctl start ipsec.service

If unsure of the specific init system used on the system, the "ipsec"
command can also be used to start or stop the ipsec service.  This
command will auto-detect the init system and invoke it:

    ipsec start
    ipsec stop

## Status

For a connection status overview, use:

    ipsec trafficstatus

For a brief status overview, use:

    ipsec briefstatus

For a machine readable global status, use:

    ipsec globalstatus

## Configuration

Most of the libreswan configuration is stored in /etc/ipsec.conf and
/etc/ipsec.secrets .  Include files may be present in /etc/ipsec.d/
See the respective man pages for more information.

## NSS initialisation

Libreswan uses NSS to store private keys and X.509 certificates.  The
NSS database should have been initialised by the package installer.
If not, the NSS database can be initialised using:

    ipsec initnss

PKCS#12 certificates (.p12 files) can be imported using:

    ipsec import /path/to/your.p12

See README.NSS and `certutil --help` for more details on using NSS and
migrating from the old Openswan `/etc/ipsec.d/` directories to using
NSS.

## Upgrading

If you are upgrading from older Libreswan versions, Libreswan 5.x you
might need to adjust your config files, although great care has been
put into making the configuration files full backwards compatible.

See 'man ipsec.conf' for the list of options to find any new features.

You can run `make install` on top of your old version - it will not
overwrite your your `/etc/ipsec.*` configuration files.  The default
install target installs in `/usr/local`.  Ensure you do not install
libreswan twice, one from a distribution package in /usr and once
manually in /usr/local.

Note that for rpm based systems, the NSS directory changed from
/etc/ipsec.d to /var/lib/ipsec/nss/

## Help

Mailing lists:

The mailing lists, including archives are at
https://lists.libreswan.org/

Wiki:

Libreswan's wiki is at https://libreswan.org/wiki/Main_Page.  It
contains documentation, interop guides and other useful information.

IRC:

Libreswan developers and users can be found on IRC, on
irc.libera.chat #libreswan

## Bugs

Bugs can be reported on the mailing list swan-dev@lists.libreswan.org
or using our bug tracking system, at:

    https://github.com/libreswan/libreswan/issues

## Security Information

All security issues found that require public disclosure will receive
proper CVE tracking numbers (see https://www.mitre.org/) and will be
co-ordinated via the vendor-sec / oss-security lists.  A complete list
of known security vulnerabilities is available at:

    https://libreswan.org/security/

Please contact security@libreswan.org or:

    https://github.com/libreswan/libreswan/security

if you suspect you have found a security issue or vulnerability in
libreswan.  Encrypted email can be received encrypted to the libreswan
OpenPGP key.  We strongly encourage you to report potential security
vulnerabilities to us before disclosing them in a public forum or in a
public security paper or conference.

## Development

Those interested in the development, patches, and beta releases of
Libreswan can join the development mailing list
swan-dev@lists.libreswan.org or talk to the development team on IRC in
#libreswan on irc.libera.chat

For those who want to track things a bit more closely, the
swan-commits@lists.libreswan.org mailing list will mail all the commit
messages when they happen.  This list is quite busy during active
development periods.

## Documentation

The most up to date documentation consists of the man pages that come
with the software.  Further documentation can be found at:

    https://libreswan.org/

and the wiki at:

    https://libreswan.org/wiki/
